If you have your Bible, we'll be coming from the Gospels.
Our scripture reading is from Matthew chapter 16, and we'll start at verse 24.
Matthew chapter 16, starting at verse 24.
I'll just read 24 now.
We'll get back into Matthew later.
The scripture says, then said, Jesus unto his disciples, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself.
and take up his cross and follow me.
Let him deny himself, take up his cross and follow me.
Our message this Sabbath is entitled, the science of surrender.
The science of surrender.
Let's pray, Father God, we thank you for this opportunity to study your word and your truths.
And once again, Lord, I ask that you just make me a nail on the wall.
Upon that nail, Lord, I ask that you hang a portrait of Jesus Christ.
Let me not be seen or heard, Lord.
What we need is to hear a word from the throne room of grace.
As I pray in Jesus's precious and holy name, let the church say amen.
We're gonna jump to the book of Luke, the 22nd chapter.
And this story is one of the most important stories in scripture.
For us to understand our own suffering, it's critical we understand the suffering that Christ went through.
The reason so many people find challenges in life and trials in life so difficult is because they have not studied the challenges and trials Christ had to bear.
I want you to think about the fact that just a few days before what we're about to read,
Jesus entered into Jerusalem like a king.
People laid down palm branches and shouted Hosanna in the highest.
They treated Jesus as a returning monarch.
Everyone was excited.
The stories of his miracles rang through the crowds and it would seem as if Satan was vanquished as if he had already lost.
But in just a few short days, Jesus is led
leads his disciples to the place where they would have their last supper.
And there it is revealed by Jesus that not only are things going to be difficult, and that he is gonna go to his death, but that he would be denied by one of his disciples and betrayed by another one.
The disciples couldn't believe their ears and all thought they would stand
But this was in the room of the Last Supper.
They were shocked that he would wash their feet.
They were shocked at his words and they began to watch as his countenance began to change.
You see, Jesus's ministry was on a timer.
There were prophecies in place that had to be fulfilled at very specific times.
One of the reasons that we as a church study the book of Daniel in Revelation
And specifically Daniel, as I'm referring to here, is that when we read and study like the 490-year prophecy, it speaks to the exactness and the precision to which prophecy is fulfilled and God's will is carried out.
In the middle of the last week of that prophecy, it says that the Messiah would be cut off.
I can only imagine that as Jesus is going towards the day when the Messiah, He Himself, would be cut off.
I would imagine a weight begins to grow on Christ.
What is inevitable, what is about to take place is unavoidable.
There is a conflict, seemingly even a striking
a challenge that Jesus is going to face.
And this challenge would be like nothing anyone else has ever faced in all of Earth's history, nor will ever face again.
You see, when we are tempted, we might be able to write a check, if you're lucky.
You might be able to call a relative or a friend.
Jesus was tempted and he could bring up from in himself divinity.
That means there was never a problem Jesus had that he could not in his divine nature solve.
That means he had an extra layer of temptation.
Don't miss this.
He had the ability to fix everything yet allowed everything.
The scripture says that when he came out as they were coming out of this last meeting together and went as he was want to the Mount of Olives.
And his disciples also followed him.
Jesus leaves and begins to go.
The disciples follow him.
Verse 40 of Luke 22 says, and when he was at the place, he said unto them, pray that you enter not into temptation.
He gives them only one instruction, not just a few minutes, hours before they were clamoring over who would be the highest in the kingdom.
But here not all he asks is that they just
pray.
Why does he want them to pray?
Because as his attention is diverted to surviving this great crisis, he cannot watch the disciples like he normally does.
He now is being barraged by all the forces of Satan.
The spirit of prophecy tells us that over the three years of his life, Satan has worked tirelessly planning for this day because watch this while we may not know prophecy Satan does.
And he knew this day was going to come.
And now legions of demons surround Christ, separating him from everyone else.
The sin of the world now, he is the Passover lamb.
And don't forget, he's crucified right as the Passover lamb would have been killed.
But instead of the Passover lamb dying, it is the veil in the temple rips.
The lamb escapes and Christ dies on the cross because he is the lamb slain.
from the foundation of the world.
But the sin of the people was always placed on that innocent lamb.
Now the sins of the world present, past, and future are laid on Christ.
I want you to think how heavy that weight must have been.
So he can't keep track of his disciples.
He says, pray that you enter not into temptation.
Matthew says it like this to jump out of Luke for a second.
Matthew 26 says it like this.
This is what he would have said to his disciples.
He says, my soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.
Terri here and watch with me.
He doesn't just tell them to wait, pray so that you don't enter temptation.
Jesus even has to divulge his own weakness.
Here Jesus shows his vulnerability.
Here he shows his humanity.
This statement means that he will not exercise divinity to get out of this pickle.
Somebody ought to say amen.
Here, Jesus says instead, he simply says, listen, my soul is exceedingly sorrowful.
How much sorrow did the weight of sin bring to Christ?
He said he was sorrowful, even unto death.
Why?
Because now, Christ began to be separated, or he felt separated from his father.
He just said, stay here, watch with me.
Luke 22.41 says, and he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, about a stone's throw distance from them.
My Bible tells me that Jesus gets down on his knees and he begins to pray.
He begins to pray and he says, Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me.
Nevertheless, not my will, but your will be done.
Here, Jesus shows us the example of surrender.
Here Jesus, who is equally God, in fact Paul says he thought it not robbery to be equal with God.
Here is the second part of the Godhead.
Here he is clothed in humanity, 100% God, 100% man.
And he is in this tough spot, the weight of sin crushing him.
And if it was up to him, and why is this so important?
It shows Jesus had a will of his own.
If he could have, if there was another way, he would have taken it.
But he surrenders and that word nevertheless is critical.
Doesn't matter what my will is.
Not my will, your will be done.
With this Jesus sets the example for every Christian.
This should be the language of our heart.
Not my will, your will be done.
It's not what I want to watch, Jesus.
What would you want me to do?
Not what I listen to, Lord.
What would you want me to listen to?
I know this person might be attractive to me, Lord, but it's not who I want to date.
Who do you want me to date?
Yeah, it's tough when you start to apply it to everything, isn't it?
I like this thing, but I know it's not good for me.
Lord, not my will.
Your will be done.
Scripture says, Mark 1435, he says, and he went forward a little and fell on the ground and prayed that if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.
Mark says it a different way.
And remember, Mark is writing for Peter.
So this is Peter's vantage point.
If you triangulate with the synoptic gospels, this is Peter's angle.
He says, I prayed that if it were possible, the hour might pass from me.
Then verse 36, he says, and he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto you.
take away this cup from me."
He asked the question, some of us have to ask when we get bad diagnosis or when we have an unfaithful spouse or a wayward child.
You have to ask, Lord, many people want to say, why me?
Did you know Jesus had that same challenge?
He said, Father, you can do anything.
Why do I have to walk this way?
He said, you can take away this cup for me.
And again, that word, Peter's angle, Peter says, I want you to know nevertheless, not what I will, not what I want, but what you want.
It is in this stroke that Jesus surrenders.
Here he shows you the power of surrendering and what I found as I was doing research on this, because I'm looking at how it is that in my own life I can surrender.
How do I really give things completely over to Christ?
Because it's not easy.
When you're a man and you're raised that you're supposed to be protector and provider, that you're a father and you're supposed to know all the answers when your kids asks the tough questions.
When you're raised to believe that as a man, especially, there's supposed to be an invincibility and a matter of control.
It is one of the reasons, ladies, that a lot of times your husband, even if he's lost, will no longer, will not ask directions.
Fortunately, they've invented GPS.
That's kind of helped solve that problem for most of us, but I know brothers won't even listen to the GPS.
Watch this.
Why is surrender so important?
When we try to control the uncontrollable outcomes, our brains actually shift.
When life puts in front of us challenges and difficulties that we literally can't really move ourselves, you can't control what someone else does.
You can't control how someone else is going to respond.
You can't even sometimes control what your own body does.
You can't control your cravings.
When you say, listen, I'm a controller anyway.
What happens is the amygdala, the part of the brain that is control of emotions, the fear center, some call it, it gets dominance.
Don't miss this.
By default, when you say, listen, I'm going to keep control, what you say, what happens in the mind is that the part of your mind that is supposed to, if you look at the last bullet, the part of the mind that helps you to have judgment and reason is literally a turn down and the part of the brain that fears is elevated.
Cortisol is released.
and you go into a state of chronic fight or flight.
We talked about this a little bit last Sabbath.
And here now, rather than walking in faith, you exist in fear.
And when you say, I won't turn it over, what you're doing is literally ramping this up.
Because when you say, I'm going to stay in control, it increases the threat perception.
But once you surrender, what your brain gets is a safety signaling.
I hope somebody gets that.
When you say I'll turn it over, it actually tells your brain you're in a safer place.
Now watch this.
When you surrender your will, your brain receives the message, I am not alone.
Because one of the reasons life's challenges are so terrible is the feeling of isolation.
That's what Jesus was trying to avoid.
That's why he took 12 disciples with him.
That's why he left nine behind and left the three that were closest to him to come with him further.
That's why he kept going back and asking them, are they praying?
Because what Jesus did not want to be in the moment of his greatest distress was alone.
That's why he had to surrender because he realized, like we all have to realize, you can't trust the people you came with all the time.
Sometimes we think that our spouse or our relatives or our friends or whoever has our back, but there's a point you get to in life when you realize that you're gonna have to go the rest of the way alone.
And unless you call God into the situation, you will truly be alone.
How powerful is that surrendering?
Look at what it does for Jesus.
I'm telling you, look at the example of his life.
Look at what it does for Jesus in Luke 22 and verse 43.
The Bible says, after that surrender statement, there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.
Sometimes the reason God can't send you help is because in our efforts to maintain control, we're telling him we don't want it.
The angel comes
After Jesus makes the statement, not my will, your will be done.
Here comes the angel and the spirit of prophecy in the wonderful book, The Desire of Ages.
I challenge you to read that book and be the same person when you're finished.
It talks about how the angel ministered to him.
And we see how ministers, angels ministered to the prophets like Elijah and others throughout the Bible.
Jacob wrestled with the angel of the Lord.
We see how it happened throughout the Bible, but here Jesus is out.
He's laid out.
He's weak.
The weight of the sins of the world is upon him.
And this angel shows up and the angel strengthens him.
I can imagine the angel putting Jesus's head in his arm and pointing up and saying, your father loves you.
Remember why you're doing this.
Imagine the countless millions whose lives you will save because you walk this path with thorns and bristles because you drink this cup so bitter.
Jesus was strengthened.
Now one of the pieces of the science of surrender is that when you surrender, it actively rewires the brain.
I didn't notice, I was researching this.
They have functional MRIs.
Studies that show that when people engage in trust based prayer, letting go language, saying things like, I release this to you, Lord, I trust you, Lord, not my will, but your, when you actually say it and it's meaning centered surrender, watch this.
And the MRI shows that the amygdala activity decreases.
and the prefrontal cortex regulation increases and the parasympathetic tone, the vagal nerve, the vagal activation actually also increases.
What does that mean?
It means you shift from fight or flight to a steady state of peace.
And here's where it's really critical for those of us who know where we are in prophecy.
When we see what's going on in the world,
You will not make it through the time of trouble if your amygdala is in control.
The threat that you will not be able to buy or sell will be too much.
The fear of how you'll feed your family will overwhelm you.
And as we see all of the events happening in the world right now,
Many of you don't know, but just in a few months, the president of the United States says he is going to rededicate this country back to God.
And it sounds like a good idea, except I worry sometimes what God is he talking about?
If you are not submitted and surrendered in advance, how will you stand when the time of trouble comes?
But the prefrontal cortex here, right behind the forehead bone is where the seal of God goes.
Revelation chapter seven, verses one through three.
This is where the seal of God goes.
This is where his character lives.
That's why Revelation 14 and Revelation 22, it talks about God's name being written on your forehead.
I want to submit to you that if that part of your brain is turned off, you can't get the seal.
You won't have his name.
And for your name to be written in the Lamb's book of life in heaven, his name must be written in your forehead.
So what happens?
Well,
What Surrender does, it restores parasympathetic balance, lowers heart rate and blood pressure, lowers cortisol levels, calms inflammatory signals.
This is deep.
It actually turns down inflammation in the body.
it actually physically changes you.
So there's two things I want you to get from this.
One of them is it rewires your brain to a different place because using the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, what happens is memories are placed, habits are formed, the structure of the brain is remade so that your knee jerk reaction becomes fear rather than faith.
That's what happens if you don't surrender.
You will live perpetually in fear.
But when you surrender what happens is, those same pathways are overrun by new pathways that say, I am going to trust God no matter what happens.
Luke 22 in verse 44 says it like this.
Look at this.
And his sweat was as it were, great drops of blood
falling down to the ground.
Did you get that?
Now I want you to understand that this is before any Roman soldier or the guards of the Sanhedrin laid a hand on him.
I want you to understand that he shed his blood for you before anyone touched him.
He was already bleeding.
And this is a true medical condition, in fact I made up a slide for it.
Here it is, he metadrosis.
This is an ancient, they actually have a record of this happening to people going back to ancient medical texts.
And what it is, as you can see here, if you look at the sweat gland, it's surrounded by capillaries and under extreme stress when the sympathetic nervous system is turned all the way on, those vessels can dilate and then quickly constrict.
And when that happens, if there are any fragile capillaries, they burst.
and they burst into where the sweat gland would normally release and blood comes out.
They say in generations, you might have a dozen or two dozen cases of this.
So basically, they tell you, you'll never see this in medical practice.
It is that rare.
And it's so rare because few ever carry that much stress.
And it wasn't stress like worry stress that Jesus had.
It was the weight of our sin.
separating him from God, the Father.
And here it is.
He had lived a sinless life.
Sometimes we think about how sin separates us from the Father, understand that he also was perfect.
Jesus was.
How discomforting must it have been to have to carry my sin?
From the Desire of Ages page 687 it says this, that those whom he had undertaken to save, those whom he loved so much,
should unite in the plots of Satan, speaking of Judas especially here, but I think all of us can be a part of this.
This pierced his soul.
The conflict was terrible.
Its measure was the guilt of his nation, of his accusers and betrayer, the guilt of a world lying in wickedness.
The sins of men weighed heavily upon Christ and the sense of God's wrath against sin was crushing out his life.
Luke 22.45.
When he rose up from prayer and he was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for sorrow.
That can be translated, sleeping in sorrow.
The disciples began to realize maybe this guy's not going to be king.
Maybe all our hopes aren't going to come out the way we wanted them to.
The sorrow and anguish on Christ's face made him actually look different according to Isaiah.
And they knew that something was very wrong.
And Jesus goes back to them in verse 46.
And he said unto them, why sleep ye, rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation.
And here it is.
We have six steps, six things I want you to look at when it comes to the science of surrender.
Six things I want you to look at.
Number one, surrender is not passive.
It is directed strength.
Surrender is not resignation.
It is the intentional alignment of the will with the will with God's will.
It is not giving up.
It is what?
It's giving it over.
You don't, you don't, you're not collapsing under the emotional weight of everything and just surrendering.
This isn't your down 75 points in the fourth quarter and saying, look, maybe we all should just go home.
This is saying, no, Lord, I know what needs to be done, but I in my strength can't do it.
Lord, I turn it over to you.
I always use the analogy of driving a car.
And most of our lives, we drive our own car.
We drive the cars of our lives.
We have the wheel and we do what we want.
We play the music the way we want.
We drive crazy when we want.
We break the traffic laws we want.
I'm talking about the laws of your life.
If you're doing that in real life, you're in trouble.
Jesus comes into your life and you say, all right, Jesus, have a seat on the passenger seat.
I want you in my life.
But you still have the steering wheel.
Your foot is still on the gas and the pedal.
And so while Jesus over here telling you what the right thing to do, you're still doing what you used to do.
And eventually you realize the car is never going to go where Christ wants it to go as long as you're at the wheel.
So you swap places with Jesus and you get in the passenger seat and he gets in the driver's seat.
And now Jesus is obeying the law, but you can't help it.
You say, Lord, we're not going fast.
You sticking your foot across the middle of the car and pressing the gas.
You said, no, turn here and you'll grab the steering wheel from Jesus.
And finally you realize that you're not gonna get there like that either.
So Jesus gets you in the back seat.
And now you're sitting in the back and instead of just sitting in the back and just riding in peace, you're in Jesus here.
You know, it would have been faster if you went that way, Jesus.
It would have been better if we turned here.
And finally for you to give him control, he's got to lock you in the trunk.
That's surrender.
Surrender says, I don't even need to see the road anymore, Lord.
you drive.
Because what I want is so corrupted and polluted that I'm going to pull over and stop when we need to keep going.
And I'm going to keep going when we should have stopped.
He said, not my will, but your will be done.
If Jesus
who the Bible says created this world.
The Bible says that nothing was created that was not created by him.
Jesus, when the Bible says, let there be, he is that word, John 1 tells us.
He's the creator.
Imagine he created the world and yet Jesus has to say, not my will, your will be done.
If he had to say that, how much more do we need to say that?
Number two.
Surrender does not remove the storm.
It repositions you within it.
It changes where you sit in the ship.
God does not always calm the storm around you.
He strengthens the stability within you.
The winds may rage, but surrender anchors the soul.
When we were kids, I say this all the time.
One of my favorite songs in AY was a song with Jesus in the vessel.
You can smile at the storm and I've learned most children will never fully understand what that means.
They just don't have storms like that.
You get older and have to pay some bills and raise a family.
You start to understand them storms are real.
But what I have learned is that when Jesus is in the vessel, you can smile at the storm.
The problem is never the storm.
I'm going to say it again.
The problem is never the storm, it's whether or not Jesus is active in the vessel.
I remember when we were kids, we were poor.
My father left my mother when I was two years old.
Left my mother and married my mother's second cousin.
I have a half-brother and half-sister who are also my second cousins once removed.
Somebody ought to say, don't do that.
and my father did not want to support us.
And it was tough.
There were many months where we ran out of money before we ran out of month.
Somebody in here knows what I'm talking about.
And I remember one night as we were in dire straits, and this is in the winter cold of Connecticut.
And I remember my mother having us lay down to pray face down in the family room of our little house.
calling on God because the refrigerator and the shelves were now empty and asking God to make up what we did not have.
And I remember as we were finishing up the rounds of prayer, the doorbell rang and we ran to the door to get the door and no one was outside.
But when we looked down, thank you, but when we looked down, there were bags of groceries sitting on our porch.
I've learned that sometimes we, we fear the storm.
I told you last week what we fear, fears God.
Psalm 23 says it like this.
He restores my soul.
Verse four says, yeah, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil for thou art with me thy rod and thy staff.
They comfort me.
Surrender says God is walking with me and his rod and his staff will protect me.
Number three, surrender happens when God's glory outweighs personal comfort.
Oh, y'all missed that one.
Surrender happens when God's glory outweighs personal comfort.
True surrender begins when our desire to be comfortable is eclipsed by our desire to see God honored.
When glory becomes greater than relief, surrender becomes possible.
That means you can't always have what you want, because what you want may not bring God any glory.
In fact, it may actually bring harm to his name.
John 17.1 says this, these words spake Jesus and lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, Father, the hours come, glorify thy son.
Why did Jesus say glorify the son?
That the son also may glorify you.
This trial that you're passing through may be honestly how someone finds Jesus.
One of my best friends out in California, we were at Loma Linda together.
We worked in the urgent care on the East Campus.
When I was medical director there and we had many late nights, great time.
When he started working at Loma Linda, he was raised at Venice.
He had gone so far from God.
He would tell me his testimony of how far he had gone.
We started doing Bible studies with him again at the hospital and he was re-baptized and it was powerful.
After a while we were like partners in there.
We were handing out book steps to Christ and Bibles and giving people Bible studies right there in their urgent care.
We were having a good time and we became very close because of our relationship
being anchored in our relationship with Christ.
He called me, he just texted me this morning and told me that he had had a massive heart attack yesterday.
And this is a slim surfing guy out there on the west coast.
And he said, a massive heart attack, he had to have five stents placed, he told me.
But he was glorifying God.
I have to keep reading the text.
I was like, how is there any good in that?
He said, my sons,
He says, my sons came to see me in the hospital and when they saw my condition, my sons who have been praying for for so long, they said to me, dad, I think we need to get our lives back in order and come back to Christ.
Let me tell you something.
You may be going through a difficulty and a trial and God has his reasons for it, but others may see your trial and how you handle it and the way you surrender to God in it.
And that may be what brings them to Jesus.
Number four, surrender is both a decision and a discipline.
See, I want to think surrender is a decision because that's easy.
I can make a decision.
That's real easy.
I can make a pledge.
Dr. Facemar, we talked about this.
That's easy.
I can tell you what I'm going to do, but that's not what surrender is.
Surrender is a perpetual state of deciding.
It is constantly going back.
It begins with a choice, but it is sustained by repeated action.
Surrender is not a moment.
It is a posture.
Oh, somebody say amen.
You don't surrender for a second and then you're surrendered.
It is a posture.
It is the way you see life.
And you begin to change what you do because you're in a posture, a position of surrender.
It is choosing daily to place control.
back into God's hands.
And this is where many of us fail.
I remember at Oakwood, they would come in, I went to Oakwood.
Let me tell you something.
When I went to Oakwood, Oakwood was Oakwood.
I mean, C.D.
Brooks, E.E.
Cleveland, L.D.
Ward, Benjamin Reeves, I mean, them preachers came in there, brother, and they'd warn you at the beginning of the sermon.
They said, sometimes they say, I hope you brought good shoes, because I'm about to step on your toes.
And they preached, and you would, you'd limp back to the dorm.
They would preach so that we would want to live like Christ.
It wasn't this fuzzy, was he preaching you get nowadays?
It wasn't this feel good stuff you get now.
This was the kind of preaching that made me go back to my dorm room and say, Lord, what must I do to be saved?
Because what that is, is that it means I must die daily.
When those preachers would preach sometimes, we'd go back to the room.
And back then, we still had cassette tapes.
That tells you how old I am.
And you go back to the dorm.
Everybody taking all their public enemy and run DMC.
And some of the other guys that have Michael Jackson and Princeton, everybody started tossing their stuff in the trash.
Some of y'all know who those artists are.
I could tell some of y'all have no idea.
That's good.
Some would toss Bob Marley and Shaba ranks.
I mean, they were just tossing stuff.
Garbage cans full.
All of us repenting collectively like Israel.
And we just thrown everything away.
And a few weeks later, you'd hear that beat coming out of somebody room again.
And another room.
Because collectively we decided we were going to follow God the day that sermon was made.
But we were not in a posture of surrender.
And so it didn't take but so much time before the music caught us back up.
Before Satan said, you know if you just listen to that, that R. Kelly song ain't so bad.
Oh, yes, it was.
I don't care about him telling you he believes he can fly.
It was bad.
There was no safe place and Satan, this is how he gets you to come off of your decision.
He tries to convince you, you can remain surrendered and compromised at the same time.
But you can't.
Total surrender.
is a posture.
Number five, surrender is the replacement of our thoughts with God's promises.
It is the replacement of our thoughts with God's promises.
Surrender is not emotional suppression.
It is cognitive renewal.
It is exchanging our narrative for his word.
It is allowing truth to overrule fear.
I hope somebody's getting this.
Surrender does not say, I have no feelings.
Surrender does not say, I have no concern.
Surrender says that when the devil brings up thought, I'm gonna respond to the devil like Jesus did.
When the devil put the thought in Jesus' mind, he said to him, if you be the son of God, turn these stones to bread.
Jesus did not contemplate this thought.
What did he do?
He replaced it with God's word.
He said, it is written.
And I want to challenge you that if it's necessary, go and get some index cards and write out Bible promises.
And when the challenge comes to you, bring it out and read it.
Dr. Kelly will remember that.
I learned that trick at Loma Linda when we were at the Veterans Hospital teaching the stop smoking classes under Dr. Linda Ferry.
And I learned that trick.
Let me tell you something.
That's one of the most powerful behavior change tricks I've ever learned.
Write down the promise on one side of the card and on the other side, write why it is you need to stay in a position of surrender.
Those veterans, some of them two, three pack a day smokers would write, I want to be alive to see my grandbaby graduate high school.
I've learned that love is a far better motivator than fear.
I've learned that in practicing medicine.
I could show people black lungs and show them the cost of cigarettes and all kinds of stuff.
If I say, listen, if you keep smoking like this, if you are able to go to her wedding in 20 years, you're going to be going with an oxygen tank.
They're going to have to wheel you down.
Do you want your, your grandbaby to have to wheel you down the aisle?
How much do you love your grand?
And that's when people start saying, you know what?
I might not have the strength to surrender this thing for me.
but I love my family so much, I'll surrender it for them.
And if your relationship with Jesus Christ is right, you start to say, you know what?
It's hard for me to surrender this for me, but I love the Lord so much, I've got to surrender it for him.
That's why Romans 12 2 says, and be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind that you may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect
will of God.
You cannot read his word and claim his promises and stay in the mind you're in right now.
The Bible says God's word cannot go out and come back void.
Number six, you cannot be spiritually asleep and spiritually surrendered at the same time.
Surrender requires awareness, watchfulness, intentionality, a passive soul drifts
A surrendered soul stays awake.
That's why the Bible tells you to watch.
Because in your surrender, you've still got to be looking out.
Because while you're surrendering, Satan is advancing.
He's attacking.
In fact, isn't it interesting when you read the story of Gethsemane, as Jesus has finally turned to his disciples and he has to say to them, listen, it's all right.
The time has come.
Get up.
You know, Jesus has surrendered.
The angel has helped him.
He's ready to go forward.
He wakes up.
His countenance has changed.
The next thing that the Bible says happened is Judas shows up.
You've got to be awake because when you decide to make the surrender, the devil is going to send your Judas.
That's when he's going to send a person who's going to whisper in your ear, your surrender is not necessary.
That there's another way.
That's a Judas thought, Judas thought.
that if he forced Jesus' hand, Jesus would then step out and say, okay, I'm gonna be the king of Israel now.
I'm gonna take David's throne.
I'm gonna vanquish these Romans and we're all gonna be good.
That's what Judas thought was going to happen.
But it didn't.
Luke 21, 36, watch ye therefore and pray always that you may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of Man.
Surrender means you watch.
You're careful what you allow in.
I do these presentations on Hollywood and I'm always amazed how blatant some of the stuff is.
Literally, they are in doctrine.
If you sit and watch Netflix and Hulu and all this stuff, it's almost like they've got a curriculum against Christianity.
It is like they have designed the thing to destroy families, to make convention that you can just sleep around, to convince you that fame and money are what's most important and most of all they want to convince you that the God of Heaven is not real or not worthwhile.
The reason so many young people leave the church, this is something we don't talk about.
We talk about the university systems and public schools and other types of schools.
We talk about this, but we don't realize that most American children are being constantly bombarded with messages that are contradictory to the scripture.
And then we wonder why they turn 18 years old and walk away from church.
You gotta watch.
1 Peter 4 in verse 7 says it like this, but the end of all things is at hand.
Be there for what?
Sober and watch unto prayer.
Mark 1437 speaks about Peter and his watching.
Peter had bragged that no matter what Jesus did, it wouldn't matter.
Peter said, listen, I'll follow you all the way to the death.
Peter was bragging.
Jesus comes walking back to them and he cometh and findeth them sleeping and said unto Peter, Simon sleepest thou?
Couldn't you just watch for one hour?
Watch ye and pray lest ye enter into temptation.
Then look at what he says.
The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak.
Two quick lessons to pull from this.
Number one, we are in the last hours of earth's history.
You just gotta watch for an hour.
You know what the Bible says?
The Bible says that these times that we're walking into are so terrible that God is going to cut time short for the elect's sake.
That's how terrible the times are about to get.
That means you've just got to watch for a little while.
Watch until He comes.
But the other part of this, Jesus says the Spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak.
The other part of this is if you're going to watch and surrender, you have to starve the flesh and feed the spirit.
A book we talked about a lot this week, Ministry of Healing says this, many who profess to be Christ followers have an anxious, troubled heart because they are afraid to trust themselves with God.
They do not make a complete surrender to him, for they shrink from the consequences that such a surrender may involve.
Unless they do make this surrender, they cannot find peace.
I've been there.
You think about, you know, do you really want to give that thing up?
That's not going to be comfortable.
I like that thing.
It relaxes me.
Well, what God is saying, what God is trying to tell us is that we have to be willing to surrender because the temporary reward we get from the things that destroy us don't compare
to the eternal peace Christ is offering us.
She says there are many whose hearts are aching under a load of care because they seek to reach the world standard.
They have chosen its service, accepted its perplexities, adopted its customs.
Thus their character is marred and their life made a weariness.
The continual worry is wearing out the life forces trying to keep up with the Joneses.
Our Lord desires them to lay aside this yoke of bondage.
He invites them to accept his yoke.
He says, my yoke is easy and my burden is light.
Worry is blind and cannot discern the future.
But Jesus sees the end from the beginning.
In every difficulty, He has His way prepared to bring relief.
No good thing will He withhold from them that walk uprightly.
When you surrender, He takes it.
You see the three Hebrew boys?
They could surrender.
And they said, listen, it doesn't matter what you do.
It doesn't really matter.
Our God can deliver us.
We're sure of that.
Well, we love Him so much.
We trust Him so much.
We're so surrendered to Him that you can do what you want with us.
Because even if He chooses not to deliver us, we still trust that that's the best thing for us.
Our Heavenly Father has a thousand ways to provide for us of which we know nothing.
Those who accept the one principle of making the service of God supreme will find perplexities vanish and a plain path before their feet.
Making God service supreme means what's in our refrigerators, our cupboards, what we put into our bodies,
It means what we watch, what we listen to, who we associate with.
Making His service supreme means that in every part of our life, we surrender it to God.
That's why Jesus says it like this, Father, if you be willing, remove this cup from me.
But the science of surrender says nevertheless, not my will, but yours be done.
I want that kind of surrender because I do understand prophetically, we're going into a time where if I'm in control, I'm in trouble.
I need Jesus to walk not just with me, but in me.
I'll close with this story of my favorites.
This is from the early 1950s.
The guy I'm going to focus on is this guy, Jim Elliott, and he had gone to Ecuador
He and five missionaries, Jim Elliott, Nate Saint, Pete Fleming, Ed McCully, and Roger Euterine, felt called to reach the Wadownee people, also called the Alkas, a tribe with a reputation of extreme violence and isolation in the Ecuadorian jungle.
On January 3rd, 1956, they landed on a sandbar along the Carari River, a Palm Beach they called it.
And there they were.
They began to learn the language.
They didn't just go rushing in.
They flown planes.
They dropped gifts.
They learned a language.
They created peaceful signs with some of the tribesmen that were below.
And they thought they had it in.
And so they landed January 3rd.
But things changed.
January 8th while they were out.
And one of the keys to know about the story is they were armed.
They had guns.
And while they were out,
Many of the tribesmen, the warriors came out with spears.
Within minutes, all five missionaries had been speared to death.
Jim was only 28 years old.
They could have defended themselves.
They had guns, but they made the decision before they went that if it came to it, they would die because they knew Christ.
They said, we have heaven.
We can die, but it'll give them the opportunity to still get to know him.
When news reached America, there was shock.
Many Christians in America back in the 1950s says they were foolish.
Why would they ever go to such a place?
Why would they even try?
Why leave the comfort of the United States to go into that kind of hostile environment?
And you'd think the story was just over there.
Nope.
Two years later, Jim's wife, Elizabeth, went back.
She began to live with the people.
Nate's saint sister, Rachel's saint, lived with them as well.
They weren't looking for revenge.
They weren't there in anger.
But with forgiveness, they went.
And over time, many of the very men who killed their brother and their husband were baptized to come to know Jesus Christ as their savior.
In fact, one of the warriors, Minkaiye, later on baptized people in the very river, those five missionaries were killed in.
Church, this is long-term surrender.
How powerful is surrender?
This is what Jim had written in his journal long before he ever made the flight to Ecuador.
Jim said he is no fool who gives what he cannot keep to gain
what he cannot lose.
Church, this is why I'm a Christian.
Because when God asked me to give things up, I realized I'm giving up something that's temporary anyway.
I talk about my cousins who played in the NFL and gotten awards and one got a Superbowl ring.
The Bible says that one day even the elements will melt with fervent heat.
It's all temporary.
I'm okay giving up the temporary for the eternal.
I want to surrender everything to Jesus.
I want to give it all over to Him.
I want to be a new creature in Christ.
I don't want to play church.
Playing church is a smack in the face of God and it only ushers you closer to the fires of hell.
I want to be a Christian on the inside.
I want Jesus to live here.
I want Him holding the steering wheel and I want to be in the trunk of the car.
If that's what you want.
If you want to let Jesus into your life and be a Christian, just join me.
Join me down front.
We had his bowed and every eye is closed.
We're going to pray.
No one else needs to know what it is that you need to surrender.
But we all have something we need to give over.
I know for me there's so much.
I've learned so much here at Eden Valley
I just ask God to take the wheel.
I'm alright in the trunk as long as we get the glory.
I'm alright.
And as you just sit in your mind and think about what God is trying to do in your life, don't worry about what anybody else is doing or thinking.
Irrelevant what they're doing right now.
Where are you with Jesus?
Are you like Peter bragging about how you'll defend Christ
How much of a Christian and how well you know him, but when the time comes, you're sleeping.
We need to watch and we need to be ready.
Father God, we thank you for this opportunity, Lord, to just worship you on this, your holy Sabbath day.
We thank you, Lord, for your goodness and for your grace.
Lord, you're merciful to us because of our lack of surrender.
You could have wiped us out because Lord, we continue to live the way we want to live.
You were justified to allow death to visit us.
For the wages of sin is death.
Ah, but we thank you, Lord, that the gift of God is eternal life through Christ Jesus our Lord.
And we need to surrender to him.
When we read about the story in God's seminary, a lot of times we like to focus on what the Sanhedrin did to you, Lord, and what the Roman soldiers did and what it was like on the cross.
But Lord, your anguish began
simply when my sin was placed upon you.
Lord, when our sin was placed upon you, you began to sweat drops of blood.
The anguish was so great.
The isolation so deafening.
And yet, Lord, you did not shy away from what your purpose was because you could look through time and see Eric Walsh's need.
You could look through time and see how he would need you for salvation.
And you look through time and thought, oh, I want my son to spend eternity with me.
Thank you, Father, that you allowed Jesus to see that for each one of us.
You want to save us all because you love us all.
Help us to surrender.
Help us, Lord, to give it over to you.
help us to live for you and let it not be for selfish reasons.
Lord, let us surrender so that you might be glorified.
This is our prayer in Jesus' precious and holy name.
Let the church say amen and amen.
This media was brought to you by Audioverse, a website dedicated to spreading God's word through free sermon audio and much more.
If you would like to know more about Audioverse or if you would like to listen to more sermons, please visit
www.audioverse.org